The industrial revolution is a process of development in the latter half of the 18th century that upgraded largely rural areas into industrialized, urban ones.
Major industrialization and innovation that took place in that period.
This revolution first began in Britain in the 18th centuary and from there spred to other parts of the world.
In this period hand production methods changed to machines, new chemical manufacturing and iron production processes, the increasing use of steam power and water power, the development of machine tools and the rise of the mechanized factory system.
The main features involved in the Industrial Revolution were technological, socioeconomic, and cultural.
The technological changes the use of new energy resources, important developments in transportation and communication, including the steam locomotive, steamship, automobile, airplane, telegraph, and radio and the increasing application of science to industry.
More efficient, mechanized production meant Britain’s new textile factories could meet the growing demand for cloth both at home and abroad, where the nation’s many overseas colonies provided a captive market for its goods.More efficient, mechanized production meant Britain’s new textile factories could meet the growing demand for cloth both at home and abroad, where the nation’s many overseas colonies provided a captive market for its goods.
Just as steam engines needed coal, steam power allowed miners to go deeper and extract more of this relatively cheap energy source. The demand for coal skyrocketed throughout the Industrial Revolution and beyond, as it would be needed to run not only the factories used to produce manufactured goods, but also the railroads and steamships used for transporting them.
Textiles were the dominant industry of the Industrial Revolution in terms of employment, value of output and capital invested. The textile industry was also the first to use modern production methods.
The Industrial Revolution marks a major turning point in history; almost every aspect of daily life was influenced in some way. In particular, average income and population began to exhibit unprecedented sustained growth.
The development of trade and the rise of business were among the major causes of the Industrial Revolution.
The most important effect of the Industrial Revolution was that the standard of living for the general population in the western world began to increase consistently for the first time in history.


























Capitalism is an economic system in which private individuals or businesses own capital goods.
The production of goods and services is based on supply and demand in the general market.
Capitalism is the dominant mode of production in the Indian economy. India's agriculture is increasingly comng under its way: industry has long been the home of capitalism. Modern capitalist societies marked by a universalization of money-based social relations, a consistently large and system-wide class of workers who must work for wages and a capitalist class which owns the means of production developed in Western Europe in a process that led to the Industrial Revolution.
In India we have compassionate capitalism, it is capitalism in mind and socialism at heart, a creed which looks at fairness and at ensuring that everyone is better off. 
Today, most countries practice a mixed capitalist system that includes some degree of government regulation of business and ownership of select industries.
Pure capitalism can be contrasted with pure socialism where all means of production are collective or state-owned and mixed economies which lie on a continuum between pure capitalism and pure socialism.
If we have to make capitalism acceptable to a majority of Indians who are poor and to create jobs, “every senior management person of an Indian corporation has to show self-restraint in his or her compensation and perquisites. He or she has to fight for maintaining a reasonable ratio between the lowest salary and the highest salary in a corporation in a poor country like India. The board has to create a climate of opinion for such a fairness by their actions.
Compassionate capitalism must also emphasise conscious reciprocity, a concept which implies that the giver gets as much as the receiver. The giver must recognise the role of all those who enabled his or her economic rise, and feel grateful for having the opportunity to give, while the receiver should be grateful not only for the contribution but for having an opportunity to enable someone to contribute.













Since ancient times, Muslim have invaded our country many times, due to which many evil practices took birth in our country such as child marriage, veil system, sati practice, multi wife marriage practice (Polygamy), dowry system, mismatched marriage, etc. 


Child marriage – It is a marriage of a girl or a boy before the age of 18 and refers to both formal marriage and informal unions in which children under the age of 18 live with a partner as if married. 

An act passed in 1929, the government passed a law banning the practice, and it was updated again in 2006. Today, both women under 18 and men under 21 is said to be an illegal age of marriage. 


Veil system – Facial veiling is not sanctioned in Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, and Sikhism but some sections of the society from 1st century the use of the veil for married women, which came to be known as ghoonghat.  

 

Sati practice – The sati was a historical practice found chiefly among Hindu in the northern regions of South Asia in which a widow sacrifices herself by sitting atop her deceased husband’s funeral pyre. 

Lord William Butinck (Governor General) helped Raja Rammohan Roy to ban the sati practice. 



Polygamy – When a man married to more than one wife at the same time is called polygamy. 

By section - 494 and 495 (on 1955 for Hindu religion) this act is illegal.  

 

Dowry system – In India this system refers to the durable goods, cash and real or movable property that the bride’s family gives to the bridegroom, his parents and his relatives as a condition of the marriage.  

Dowry Prohibition Act (1961) If any person, after the commencement of this Act, gives or takes the dowry, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years. 











There are many factors which influenced in culture, which are as follows:

Culture includes the social ethics, principles, or morals seen in society. A method of living that encompasses people’s beliefs, values, customs, language, and traditions is what we know to be culture.
Culture influences how we enter into and mantain relationships.
It influences whether and how we value traits like humility, self-esteem, politeness, and assertiveness. 
Culture also influences how we define success and whether you value certain types of individual and group achievements.
Culture shapes the system of education, role of churches, temples, mosques etc. on education system i.e. mental process of behaviour.
Culture influences our behaviors in diverse ways. It is because the culture is the people’s way of life. 
Culture gives a new change in the rural and urban areas.
It assists the economy by providing and creating jobs for individuals.
It offers delightful and beautiful experiences, providing people with emotional and intellectual intelligence.
The micro aspects of culture influence a specific group within a society.
Culture stands as a backbone to many people. It gives them a reason to live and maintain that oneness and togetherness.
Cultural variations influence our values, which in turn affect attitudes and, ultimately, behaviors.




















































































